B for Boy, R as in Robert, OT, MAN, Rotman. And I'm a
former newspaper man who went into the public
relations field and ultimately built a large
public relations counseling firm headquartered
in Chicago. And we ended up with five offices in
five cities and abroad in London. I was CEO and
chairman of that company. up until about five
years ago when I merged it with a New York firm. Our
firm was called Hershey, Rotman & Druck, and then I
merged it with another firm, and I became
president of that firm. Then I decided to retire
three years ago. I now have a company called Morris
B. Rotman Associates, although I still serve as a
consultant to that combined firm. For all intents
and purposes, I'm no longer involved with my
previous firm. I'm retired from there. And I do my
own thing. And included in my own thing is
relationships with about six companies that know
me very well, know me for a long time, where I give
them some of my time. And most of the time, however,
I do my own thing, whatever that may be. Where was
your residence for the most part? My residence is
still in Chicago. In Chicago, OK. where my wife and
I spent six months, and where the headquarters of
our company was. I also have a residence in Palm
Springs, California, where I spend six months of
the year, from approximately November to May, and
from which, it's really not Palm Springs, it's
Rancho Mirage, but I refer to Palm Springs as
that's the one most people understand. They say
Rancho Mirage, they wonder which state it's in.
Best known for Gerald Ford, And Frank Sinatra and
people like that, not me. But I commute from Palm
Springs to my various client relationships.
During those months, I'm there. And I move all my
equipment, my files, and all that stuff. So in
effect, I set up an office for six months. And now
we're going to make the return to Chicago in May.
This is pretty much a regular routine? Yeah. How
much time do you spend here in this area? Houston
area? Well, I come down every couple months for
three days. Most of the time it's on a three-month
interval, about four times a year. But I also come
down for very special events, mostly involved
with my personal relationship with the Mitchell
family. Sometimes I come down for celebrations,
family things, opening of the pavilion. So I would
say I get to Houston or Galveston. maybe six times a
year. And as a result of our professional
relationship, George and I have become close
friends, and our families are close to one
another. So that we consider both of us, both our
families, extended families in a way. And we've
gotten to know all the kids. They know our kids. And
it's been a wonderful relationship of a true
friend. Where did you do your journalism work? I
assume your background is in journalism? Well,
the kind of background I have, I wouldn't
recommend to my son, nor to anybody else's son. If
you wanted to break into journalism or public
relations, don't do it the way I did it, because it
would be almost impossible today. I've only had a
year and a half of college work. I was in junior
college in Chicago. And there was economic
uncertainty in my family, and I was the only one to
help resolve that. So I went to work, even though I
had other brothers. I had an opportunity when I was
in college. I was editor of the paper, and a weekly
newspaper chain gave me a chance to work for two
weeks. And they were impressed with what I did, and
the publisher finally said, hey, you can finish
your college work at night. We're going to start a
new newspaper, and we'll make you the editor.
That's great. I was all of them. I think I must have
been eighteen or nineteen at that time. That's
great. That's exciting. And I became editor of a
paper called the Lakeview Booster in Chicago, a
neighborhood newspaper. And I've never stopped
working since. I went from there to being- are you
interested in my- Yes, sir. Yeah, we really are. I
worked for the newspaper for about a year, and then
they started a newspaper out in a place called
Cistro, Illinois. home base of the gangsters at
one time, Al Capone's headquarters. And the same
group of people who owned the paper I worked for
started a newspaper in Cicero, Berwyn, and Oak
Park, the three suburbs there. And they really
needed an editor and a circulation manager, jack
of all trades. And I went out there to do that kind of
work. And I worked there for about a year. It was a
very unusual experience because I wore at least
ten hats. Yeah, you got to pick up the business side
of it very quickly, too, I'm sure. Well, I sold ads.
I was circulation manager. I was editor. I was
reporter. I was proofreader. I ran a travel bureau
when I had a free day on Wednesday. I'd be waiting on
the bus. You know, you make money wherever you can,
so I used to sell tickets. And then Wednesday
nights I ran a tour of Chinatown. Is that right? For
the club ladies. All for, I think, I was making $28 a
week. And then from then, they started a newspaper
on the west side of Chicago. And I went there as
editor and publisher, in a way. I did everything
again. And then I went to the City News Bureau of
Chicago, which is a famed training ground for
journalists. And I became, I think, the first man
or woman, first employee they ever hired who
wasn't on the dean's list of a journalism school.
But the managing editor there took a chance on me
based on my background and I rose very rapidly
there from reporter to rewrite man to editor. And
from there I went to the Community Fund of Chicago,
which is a fundraising red feather agency.
They're raising funds for all the health and
welfare agencies in Chicago. I became public
relations director there for two years and I met a
lot of important executives in the business
community, met most of the top newspaper men
because I was representing You know, a cohesive
community interest there. And a man who had a
little public relations for him by the name of Bill
Hershey was impressed with my work. We had
something to do with one another. He came in, asked
my help, and my boss gave me. And he went to my boss
and said, I'd like to hire that young man. And I was
very upset. I didn't want to leave, because I had a
pretty good job there. But he kept after me. And I
finally said, listen, I'll come in as you make me a
partner. So I came in as a partner of his firm in
1949, and we worked together. Well, it was 1946,
and we worked together for a couple of years, and
then he died. He had a stroke, and luckily we were by
then a corporation, and I had the right to buy his
stock. The firm was $74,000 a year in gross. That's
the kind of fees we had. Making no money at all. And I
built it. into a six million dollar firm. You know,
just maybe desperation, whatever it was, maybe I
was there at the right time. Until we, we were the
largest public relations firm in Chicago. What
kind of accounts did you, were you developing in
those days? Well in the early days, I guess the
first tent strike I had was I got a small division of
General Motors called the Hertz Rent-A-Car.
Hertz was an obscure little company. Most people
don't know it was owned by General Motors. And GM
tried to hide it under a bushel basket, so to speak,
because they felt there was a conflict between
renting and selling cars. And they were concerned
too many people knew about it. And so Hertz
merchandised on its own without too much support
from General Motors. And ultimately, General
Motors sold it off. They wanted to get rid of an
embarrassment. I think it was a mistake in a way,
maybe. When I was working for Hertz, it was a $20
million company, something like that. And now it
must be close to a billion, a large company. But
that was a very important breakthrough for me,
because I sold a national account. And I would say
that it had another element that I liked, in that
Hertz was so small that there was a merchandising
committee, a marketing committee, so to speak,
made up of the principal licensees around the
country. And they ran the company. And I was on that
committee. See, Hertz was a kind of an association
in a way. The central organization, Hertz
Incorporated, owned what they call stations of
their own. And there were a handful of them,
leading cities. But the best cities were in Miami
and Denver and I think Los Angeles. And those
weren't owned by Hertz. And when Hertz ultimately
went public, They would then start one by one to buy
out most of the independent licensees. In those
days, it was these buccaneers, these
entrepreneurs that were running the company. And
I sat in with them. And they respected my opinion,
even though I was quite a young man. And that really
helped me develop as an individual, as a
professional. And I really enjoyed that. Then,
little by little, I began to sell accounts. We had
an office in Rochester, New York. When my partner
was alive, we had a couple of accounts there. And I
built that office, though, where we had about 14
people working for us there. We had all the leading
business in Rochester. We had the Bausch & Lomb,
Graflex Company, the makers of the camera. That's
headquarters of Kodak as well. Pardon? That used
to be the headquarters of Kodak as well. It is still
the headquarters of Kodak, sure. But we had a
handful. Taylor Instruments had some wonderful
accounts there. And then we... We had an
affiliation in New York, but when I sold an account
in New York City and opened my own office
ultimately, from a half-time employee working
for us, you know, to the point where I guess when I
hung up my shingle, we had about 150 employees
there, you know. An aside, I was thinking about the
other day when I was talking to the staff here,
Taylor Instruments. I was called over. by the PR
director. He wanted to get us in there. Been trying
for a year. He knew I was in town. He said, listen,
he's having a meeting today, and they agreed to see
you. I said, I'm not even prepared. I don't have
anything. I don't have an easel or anything like
that. He said, come over, do the best you can. So I
came. All I had was a handful of flippings, you
know, illustrating what we did for Bausch and
Lund. And I got into this room, and it was kind of
fall, and the red ear was on. And it was so hot. And of
course, I was nervous. I was perspiring for juice.
And I started to say to the chairman of the company,
he said, what kind of organization are you? I said,
well, we're kind of a shirt sleeves organization,
you know. Get down the brass tacks and all that
stuff. Principled and honest and all that. And I
was perspiring. And I said, do you mind if I take off
my coat? So I took off my jacket and I hung it up on
something. Everybody else was suited up. And they
told me the turning point was I dramatically
illustrated how sure you were. And I did it
unconsciously. I didn't do it for that reason. And
the other account, of course, Bausch & Lomb was a
tremendous coup because we were selected from
competition. All other major agencies wanted
that account. I think the reason we got it was we had
another account in Rochester. We had a little
office there, finally. Bausch & Lomb became very
important to me in my whole professional career
because at one time they developed the
cinemascope lens with Spiros Skouras and 20th
Century Fox. And they did the first film,
cinemascope film, The Rope, if you remember that.
Yeah, sure. And President Bausch & Lomb called me
in one day and said, you know, we deserve a special
award from the Academy for our development in that
scientific field. optics system, and he said, all
of our people have tried to talk to the academy. In
fact, the head of the academy's technical
advisory committee has tried to get it for us, and
maybe you can do something. Do you know anybody out
there? I said, no, but I'll sure as hell try. So I
contacted a number of people, and I found out who
the head of the academy was. It was a woman named
Margaret Herrick. Do you want to know all this?
Yeah, go ahead. This is fun. This is fascinating.
And Margaret Herrick... I got an appointment with
her through a contact, and she said, when she
talked to me, she said, I'm only going to give you a
half hour. So she knew what I wanted. So I sat down
and I said, how do you go about getting an award? I
think they deserve it. She said, you don't ask for
it. They've made the mistake of asking for an award
through the years. So I did something that was
unconsciously brilliant. I said to her, do you
mind if I destroy the file? That wasn't, again, it
isn't a device that I invented. It was just an idea.
Why not start fresh? It's a conscious reaction.
She had a kind of a wry look to her face. She was kind
of bemused. She reached in her phone. She gave it to
me. I tore it up and I threw it in her wastebasket. I
said, okay, let's start fresh. The half hour
extended to about three and a half hours. She's a
very busy lady. She told me how people have gotten
awards for contributions to the motion picture
industry. Honest contributions. And I said to
her, is there anything that's needed in the motion
picture industry I might be able to influence my
client to do on a long-range basis? And they were
looking for a means of copying all those films that
were copied on paper and were turning into dust in
the Library of Congress. You look at history and
motion picture, a lot of that stuff's on paper. And
it's disappearing. You know, a national
treasure. And Bausch & Lomb had copying equipment
of all kinds. And I convinced Bausch & Lomb to
contribute all that copying equipment. And then
the whole process started, which still goes on to
this day. Now, they didn't get an award for that.
No. But the climate was right, so that the Academy
felt... Appreciated what they were doing. Knew
them. All of a sudden, they looked at Bausch & Lomb
in a different light. And about a year later, The
head of the academy called me and says, can you get
your client to Hollywood on such and such a date? I
know it was the day of the Oscar. I said, what's the
purpose? Just get them there. Now, what happened
there, the reason it was a turning point in my life,
was that lady, a very smart lady, was looking at me,
as well as my client, and she was saying to herself,
this guy may be the guy who can handle our public
relations, which is on a thought that never
occurred to me. You know, it was a dream. Small
agency in Chicago to get the famous Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Yeah, so she
said to me in her first, what would you think about
handling an account like this? I said, well, I
think it would be fantastic. I said, but I don't
know, number one, I don't know too much about the
agency. Number two, I guess I'd have to open an
office here, and I don't know if I could afford to.
And number three, I understand you have an
incumbent, and I never take business away from
anybody unless they've been informed that
they're going out. I said, have you informed the
incumbent? She said, no. I said, when you do, if you
want me to, I'll come back. Well, that impressed
her. It's, again, one of these unconscious things
you do. Now, maybe it's part of your basic morality
that you do the right thing under certain
circumstances. And my morality has never been to
take an account away from anybody, an incumbent.
I've done it. client asked me to come in, I always
see that the circumstances are such that they're
totally dissatisfied and have informed the other
agency that they're going to interview us.
Because I don't want people to do that to me either.
No, you're right. So about three months later, six
months later, whatever the case may be, she called
me. Would you come back and talk? Have you
informed? Yes. Okay, I came back and I made a
presentation. And she told her directors that we
were going to get the accounts. Well, all hell
broke out in Hollywood, because there must be 50
firms that wanted it, and they were all insiders,
and I was an outsider. My advantage was that there
would be no conflicts. And if I had the Academy
account, I wouldn't handle motion. PictureStars
or studios didn't want them. And I told them, when I
made my presentation, I wouldn't take any
conflicts. Again, it was an unconscious, or maybe
it was deliberate, move on my part that was right.
And there was such a hullabaloo. I saw telegrams
from Samuel Goldwyn, all kinds of people. How can
you select an outsider? Here's a firm you want to
select. But they called us back, and they
interviewed 20 agencies. And when I went in there,
I decided I wasn't going to make a presentation. I
was going to talk about integrity. And I closed my
presentation, which I did. And I talked about our
agencies and my principles and what I believed in
and all that. And we got the accounts. And it's
lasted to this day. Is that right? My agency still
has it, sure. Is that right? And about three years
ago, I was elected an associate member of the
Academy, which is a rare honor for a layman. I'm not
in the motion picture business. And I still go to
the Academy Awards. I've gone to 35. That's
exciting. That's quite a career. So I'm most
prominently identified, because that's such a
celebrity account, I'm most prominently
identified with the Academy. in public relations
circles. You ask people about me, they say, oh
yeah, he worked with the Academy so many years. But
actually our agency was a corporate public
relations firm with only one show business
account. Yeah, that was the Academy. We did handle
the Tournament of Roses for a number of years. That
was the only other one. But that's kind of show
business. But all our other accounts, as it
developed, were major corporations. And we grew
from our Chicago office. We already had a
Rochester office, but we opened in New York. And
then when I got the Academy, I opened in Los Angeles
with, again, a one-man office. And then I got the
Mattel account out there. Barbie doll and all
that. That became a very large account. Then we got
the Avocado Board out there. Who was the Avocado
Board then? Avocados. Oh, yeah, sure, food
production. Yeah, yeah. And marketing advisory
boards. And they have budgets and they hire PR
firms. So we did a program to get more people to use
avocados in a variety of ways. And we had the Kiwi
account and the California pistachios and, you
know, all those things need public relations
activity. It occurred to me that our firm had
service capabilities in Europe, and I bought into
a British firm, and they added our name to theirs,
and then we developed a network of firms
throughout the world, so that we had an associated
firm, where we referred business to one another,
and in some cases they used our name on the door, and
it was closer than just a loose affiliation, and we
had a a relationship in Tokyo, and in Milan, and
Rome, and Paris, and Scandinavian countries, and
South America. You know, where our clients might
need services. You did a history of your firm done.
That sounds like a good project. Well, yeah. I
started to write, make some notes on, not so much
history of the firm. You know, that's, I don't know
how interesting that is. What's interesting I
would say is some of the campaigns that I've been
in, and some of the extraordinary people that I've
worked with, like George, a fellow who invented
the idea of the rent-a-car business. Or I worked
for Harold Janine at ITT. Those are some of the
great men of American industry. And I worked with
some prominent politicians, like Stevenson.
Yeah, those are...
Now, how did I get involved with George? Is that
what you want to know? Yes, sir. I became a member in
1950, I became a member of a group called Young
Presidents Organization. Are you familiar with
YPO? We know, we've heard of it. If you would
elaborate a bit, that would be very useful. Well,
there was a fellow by the name of Ray Hickok, Hickok
Belt, who became president father's company,
tender age, maybe he was in his 20s, and he realized
he needed to talk to peers. You know, you could talk
to an attorney, talk to an accountant, but nobody
was a contemporary. So they start talking to a
couple of fellows he knew who had the same
predicament he had. And before you knew it, there
were five guys who were meeting together on a
regular basis. Well, today there are probably
6,000 members of the Young Presidents
Organization. And the criteria for admission to
YPO was that you In those days, you had to have 50
employees, a million dollars in gross value, not
net worth, but gross value. And you had to be under
40 years of age when you became president of your
company. And you retired. You retired into Never
Never Land when you were 49. You became what we call
49ers. And after that, there are two senior
organizations now. the World Business Council,
and the Chief Executives Organization, which
George Mitchell and I belong to also. And CEO, the
latter one, Chief Executives Organization, you
have to be voted into on a basis of your popularity,
prominence, or your activities. If you were
active and CEO, a lot of people knew you and voted
for you to come in. George had a very prominent
position. He was chairman a couple years back. And
I've been on the board and all that kind of stuff.
And more than that, I've run conventions. And
frankly, whenever George got a difficult job to do
and he didn't have time for it, he gave it to me.
Because he was the director and I was not, he was
named to do a convention in Phoenix. That must have
been about 10 years ago now. And he made me his vice
chairman or something like that. And I pulled the
whole thing together. And it was quite an
extraordinary event. We had a thing called
Encounters, Strange Encounters with the Fourth
Estate. And we had Dan Rather and Rook Kaiser and
Ted Koppel and Paul Conrad, the cartoonist. The
fellow who used to do sports. He had a loud voice.
What was his name? He's retired now.
Boxing and all that stuff. I forget his name. I know
the voice. You know the voice, yeah. But we had an
all-star aggregation of people talking about the
relationship between business and the Fourth
Estate. It was fascinating. George was the
chairman of it, really. But I did it. He did it. I got
it. He's pretty good at delegating things. Yeah.
And George and I have been involved in things like
that. Wherever he gets involved in something, or I
get involved in something, and I bring him into the
thing, because of our friendship. So we were on a
mission once, on a journey. YPO has had
conventions, one domestic and one local. And it's
called the University for Presidents. where you
go to a site, either internationally or locally,
you get a syllabus and a curriculum book, and you
look through it and you select courses. You and
your wife can take the courses. And it's gotten to a
point now where it's an all-star faculty, because
the best people from the universities and the best
people in politics and literature want to speak to
us. You're such an influential group. And we have a
turn-down request from people. But we've had
Presidents of the United States, the top
senators, the top scientists, you name them. And
I've become good friends with a number of people
who've come that way. And George and I were going to
Greece.
He was actually going to the conference in Athens,
and I was. And George, as you may or may not know,
seldom travels with his wife because they're
brood. They have 10 children. It's a risky
business when you've got that kind of a big family.
My wife and I always traveled together, although
we only have three children. That's a small family
compared to the Mitchell family. But George and I
sat next to each other. And he's a friendly guy, and
we kept talking. And he asked me what I do, and I
asked what he does, and he said he's in the energy
business. He's such an unassuming guy, in a way,
and an old shoe type of personality. He said he was
in the energy business. I figured he had a couple of
gas stations. I didn't know where he had. And he
said, someday we're going to go public with my
company. Again, I realized it was a small company.
And he said, you know, we probably need public
relations. I'll give you a call. And I guess we
didn't talk for about six months or a year. And he
called me one day. And he said, can you come down and
talk to our people? And I talked to his people. And
they interviewed. They interviewed maybe six
firms at that time. Because they weren't going to
accept somebody that George just met on a plane.
And we got the accounts. And, of course, I would
come down here on a very frequent basis as I
realized some of the things George was doing. What
was his charge? What was his interest in public
relations at that point when you made that first
contact? Was it energy, selling energy? Well,
when you go public, you have a disclosure
obligation. So that was the motive, really, that
he used? Well, probably in the back of his mind, he
said to himself, I'm going public, and I want to be
sure there's an appreciation of my stock. But you
think first of disclosure obligations. You know,
it's really a pain in the neck to go public. You've
got responsibility. You've got to turn on any
report, quarterly reports. You've got to
interface with the security analysts. You've got
to be prone to certain kind of publicity, which
George wasn't previously. He was a very private
person. And you need some expert guidance in that
mine field. So that's number one. I don't think
George ever said to me, I wanted my stock to go up.
No, of course not. No, I think most people don't do
that. But there's no question if you add good
communications to a good profit picture, your
stock's going to go up. The public will appreciate
it. How did you evaluate or analyze, what was your
impression of Mitchell Energy at that time, and of
George Mitchell as a public corporation, let's
say? Well, I saw that he had great leadership
potential. I saw something that intrigued me that
he was so brilliant and far-reaching and so
visionary. I hadn't run into anybody like that in a
long time. Out of my whole clientele, I probably
dealt with maybe 500 chief executives through the
years. He was way ahead of them because there's
only a couple of people I can think of in the United
States that function in the same league as George
Mitchell. Another dear friend of mine, Bob
Galvin, who owns Motorola Company. He's now
become chairman of the executive committee. He
was chairman and chief executive for many years.
Motorola went from $200 million to about $6
billion today. It takes that kind of vision and
drive and ability to pull people around you,
ability to take chances with people, a whole
variety of things. I could see that George's mind
worked so rapidly. The reason George talks fast is
because he's trying to keep up with his mind. It's
moving very, very rapidly. Yeah, we interviewed
him. It was very difficult to transcribe that
interview. I know, I know. He moves so fast. In a
way, I guess he saw a kinship in me that I shared his
dream. Whatever it is, I got on the
merry-go-round. and went with him.
What I lent to that was, along the line, there were
opportunities for dramatic execution of his
ideas.
He sees me as a visionary, too, in terms of public
relations, communications. He kids that I'm his
guru, I'm his public relations guru. Well, it
really isn't that. He's got a staff and all that.
But we talk and communicate, and I throw ideas at
him, and sometimes he goes with them, sometimes he
can't go with them, even if he wants to. And I am
unprecedented about bringing big ideas to him. So
about eight, I kicked myself, I couldn't sell it,
but about, what was it, eight, ten years ago, I went
to a man named Noguchi, a famous sculptor. The
Garden in Israel. And somewhere along the line, I
saw in one of his books that he did a children's
playground out of sculpture. I said, my God, what a
thing that would be for the Woodlands. And have
Noguchi do a children's playground. I think
people come from all over the world to see it here.
Well, I think they would. Yeah. And I had a deal
worked out with him. And Noguchi asked me. It would
take about a quarter of a million dollars to do it. I
went to George with him. He was very interested, in
fact, to the extent where he started collecting
books on Noguchi and all that. But there was a
decline right at that point in the energy market.
And he couldn't do it. Cynthia Mitchell said to me
recently, why didn't you tell me about it? You
know? It may not be too late. Well, he's dead. And
maybe the concept is still. Well, I'm not giving an
illustration of my brilliance. I'm saying I was
unhesitant about coming to George with a big idea,
because I know that he would listen, and he
wouldn't deprecate you for thinking along those
lines. But my work was really not essentially big
ideas. My work was, first of all, to set the
groundwork for a professional public relations
firm, a program to communicate what Mitchell
Energy was, essentially to the financial public.
How did you do that? Well, what I'd like to know in a
way, because neither of us are really all that
familiar with what a professional public
relations person does, if you could sort of
outline in general terms what you would do given
that situation and then reflect how that worked in
the Woodlands, for example, and with Mitchell
Energy and Development. Whenever you're ready.
When you think of what we call financial public
relations, there are various. arenas that public
relations people work in. One is marketing public
relations, where you try to sell a product and use
certain techniques along those lines. And I would
say, in the case of the Woodlands, marketing
public relations mostly comes to bear. Do you want
a Coke or something? where you try to
get publicity so people will come out here and see
the project and hopefully buy. You precondition
the audience with exposure. In the case of
financial public relations, it's a different
approach, yet some of the same techniques apply.
You have to think of financial public relations as
a distribution system, and out there, are
security analysts who are really sales promotion
then. Security analyst has stock that he sells.
And then the consumer is a customer. And so you have
a whole distribution system. You have to get
information to those people. And it's written, or
it's personal identification, face to face. It's
annual reports, which they all depend upon and
read. And it's the interim reports. So our
function was to lay out that kind of a program
first, and then to start doing the things that had
to be done, mechanical or otherwise. So it meant
help with the preparation of the annual report,
which is the most important document that goes out
every year. In addition to that, those interim
statements have to go out. You do publicity in
newspapers, and you have an earnings report. You
report the earnings to the Dow Jones. It gets on the
broad tape, and it goes out to the newspapers. And
then you back that up with personal visits,
presentations before security analysts, the
analyst societies in the major cities, New York
Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange.
And that meant we had to get George, however
reluctant he felt about it, we had to get him on the
road to go out and talk to some of those people. We
knew his personality would come to bear. And
there's nothing that's unprofessional or
improper. It's all part of the distribution.
setup that we have that's so efficient in the
United States for bringing financial
information to the people who should know. And of
course the stockholders get the same reports and
they also read the newspapers. It was important
that we talked to the financial publications like
Finance and Forbes and other publications like
that. So before long we had a man on our staff who
traveled the country to the secondary markets And
there are certain markets who are never visited by
a CEO. Let's say in Lexington, Kentucky, or
Jacksonville, Florida, where there are pockets
of investors. So what you do is you take a look at the
transfer sheets, and you see where your investors
are. And you say, well, we've got 20 investors in
Jacksonville. It means they have friends. Maybe
we ought to go down there and make a report on what
Mitchell is doing now. And there are some
communities where we know that there are very
important investors, and they don't own any
shares in Mitchell. And we may select that as the
market that we should make a presentation. And
what you do sometimes is you approach the security
firm that's making the market for you, your
principal, underwriter, and say, well, you set up
a meeting for us. Or you go to your bank and say,
well, you have your affiliate bank in Boston set up
a meeting. Or you go directly to the analyst
society and say, we can bring George Mitchell
down. and would be happy to make a presentation.
And we help with the preparation of the
presentation, so that when he goes there, he gives
the right kind of speech. And we don't write
George's speech. We may help with it. Sure. I don't
want to give the impression that this is a talking
head. Yeah, that it's canned. Yes, canned, or that
he doesn't have his own thoughts about it. George
is very, very careful, very critical about things
people want him to say. Because he has his own
intellectual acuity that he applies to
everything that you ask him to do. So that was that
program. Then the other program that was parallel
was reporting on the energy business itself. New
developments. You know, what you do is you write
news stories or you do brochures or you start to
analyze. Let me put it this way. In every public
relations campaign, the first thing you do is to do
some research to find out what the public
perception is of the company. Then you do some
internal interviews to find out the internal
perception. You work out some kind of adjustment
between the two. If there's an incorrect
alignment between the two perceptions, you make
an adjustment there. Then you find out what the
company feels it stands for, how it wants to be
known, what its publics are. make a very careful
analysis of the people we have to reach. Then we
decide what the most effective means of
communicating with those publics are. Do you have
difficulty, for example, often maybe, finding
out what a company really wants to present itself
as and helping to shape that? Well, we use a variety
of devices. One is we may do focus groups, which we
do frequently, to find out what they really mean.
Not what they're saying, but what they really
mean. We've used psychologists. We've used a
whole variety of devices. Or sometimes it gets
down to a one-on-one confrontation between me and
the CEO. Many times a CEO will hire us, and he's not
quite sure where he's done it, but he thinks he
needs it. And then he resists it right away. I
assume that might have been the role of George
Mitchell. Was it, by chance? Well, some of the
things were at play. He knew he needed you, but did
he know what he wanted you to do? Well, George has
profound perceptions about a lot of things. He
knew he needed contact with the financial
community, probably his brokerage firm, his
underwriter told him. And he had certain ideas
about what he wasn't willing to do. Even to this
day, George doesn't like to go on the road. That's
the last thing in the world that he wants to do is go
out and be a salesman. for his company, but he will
do it if it's urgent or important. Like the New York
Stock Exchange, the society there, or Chicago Key
Markets, he will do maybe once a year. But there was
a time we had a man full-time doing that. And now
there still is a man in the company who's not on my
staff, on the company staff. Over the years,
Mitchell Energy built up a very capable public
relations staff whose head until recently was Joe
Cutchin, who was a member of our staff. And
George's people want to hire him. I'll tell you
that as an aside. That's been reflective of
George's personality and sense of integrity. At
one point, they decided they needed a public
relations man internally. His staff was pushing
for it. And George agreed to it. Because there's so
much going on. Our agency couldn't handle it from
the outside. And I agreed with the concept. They
interviewed about 20 or 30 people. Finally, one
day George called me. He said, you know, they've
interviewed all kinds of people. He's the only one
they like is the guy on your staff, like Joe. And I
said, well, George, what do you want to do? And he
said, well, I told him they can't hire him unless
you agree. I think that was the benefit of our
personal relationship. He was protecting me. And
I said, George, what are you going to do for him? Are
you going to enhance his future? Is he going to make
more money? Does he have stock options? He says,
yes. I said, well, what can I say? I said, are you
going to keep the agency? He said, of course. And I
said, well, why don't you just give me, maybe
guarantee our contract at the end of the year or
something. He said, oh, no, that won't be enough.
He said, at the end of the year, they're going to
come to me and say, well, we got this guy, we got Joe,
we don't need the agency. So I said, well, what do
you want to do, George? He said, I'm going to give
you a long-term contract. I think he gave me a
three-year contract at that time, which lasted
for 20 years, you know, until I retired, you know.
But Joe came in here from our staff, and then we
appointed another executive who they liked very
well, and we worked on the accounts. And then
somewhere along the line, I think when I merged my
company and all that, or maybe slightly before
that, there was no longer need for the company and
the competent staff here. So the firm didn't
continue except on a sporadic basis. And then when
I retired, George came to me and said, do you think
you could come down here and help us review what we
do and all that stuff on a regular basis? Yeah, I
said, I don't have any conflict at that point
because you haven't been a client for a number of
years. So, you know, my contract stipulates I
guess I can't take an account until after two years
or something, something crazy. And I'm still on
the payroll of my old agency for another two more
years. So I've come down there, and first he gave me
the assignment of meeting with energy and with
real estate, and then little by little I've gotten
into HARC. You know HARC? Yeah, sure. And
yesterday I ran a seminar for the executives at
Harc on public relations. Did you? Yeah, which is
fascinating. But going back, switching back,
when George began to talk to me about the
woodlands, to me it was a fascinating concept. And
when did that occur? Do you remember when this new
community woodlands idea really emerged? All
during the time I knew him, he talked about it. He
said that this came in part out of his New
Presidents Association contacts.
I think Woodlands is what? You probably know
better than I. It's probably in this book. I can
give you an idea. He started turning this over
somewhere in the 60s. Of course, the Woodlands, I
guess, as an entity, began about 1969, 1974. But
somewhere before that, he's . Oh, before that, he
was talking about it, sure. If you tell me, if I can
remember when they went public, which I can't at
the moment. We can find that out. That's all right.
That was about the time I'll find it. But as we spent
time together and began to talk about the concept,
and what amazed me, absolutely amazed me, was how
he was approaching it from a standpoint of
safeguarding the environment and bringing the
best people that he could find. you know, that deal
with the preservation of the environment, the way
out of the woodlands, the safety, safe streets. He
was creating a perfect home environment. If I were
fresh at that point in my life, I'd have moved into
the woodlands. My God, plenty offered there.
Perfect schooling for the kids, you know, and for
preservation of flora and fauna, recreation,
unlimited recreational activities. I'm a
golfer. My God, they have three golf courses that
are available, you know. And you can buy a house
down here for half the price of what I have to pay
elsewhere. Beautiful homes. I know what I get for
3,000 feet in the Palm Springs area. If you're
spending anywhere from $700,000 to a million,
3,000 feet, or you might spend $350,000 at the most
here. At least I think so. Yeah, but at any rate, I
was just so excited about what he was doing, so
that's where he turned down the juices, and I tried
to give as many ideas as I could and as much
leadership. I would say George got something out
of me that I couldn't give to a lot of our clients. At
one point we had 150 clients, and I would only
select a handful of clients I would personally
work with. In all cases, on the Mitchell account, I
was on the top of the heap, because I was
interfacing with George and with the executives
here. At times it was rough going because people
were concerned about my close personal
relationship with George if they had to work with
me.
Because I had George's ear more than some people
could get, and his confidence, and sometimes they
were reluctant to talk to me about things that they
wouldn't want George to hear. So that's always the
case. You mean within the company? Within a
company, when you're very close to the top. I very
seldom had familial relationships with clients.
We didn't try to achieve that at all. Just a small
handful of people. And it had to develop
automatically. The wives had to like each other
first. If they don't, then you're dead. You're
going to be killed. And then you have to want to do
things with one another, with the CEO, out of the
business. You want to spend time. George and I have
traveled the world together, our families. I'm
not only George's PR guru, I'm his restaurant
grazer.
I'm his grazer. When we go on a trip, first of all,
George doesn't like to travel, and since we have a
comfortable relationship, if he finds out that
we're thinking of doing it too, it's mostly in
connection meetings of the senior YPO
organization CEO. We know a convention is going on
and my wife will say, maybe we ought to take a
post-convention trip. They frequently offer
trips. After the five-day convention, you might
go off somewhere with the group.